And I'm so excited to have everyone here. Welcome. Thank you for joining us for today's webinar on data sovereignty. It's hosted by the Alaska INBRE Community based participatory research corp. My name is Fiona Rolls and I'm a research professional at the Center for Alaska Native Health Research at the University of Alaska Fairbanks. I'm just going to give you a really brief introduction before handing it over to our speaker today. So for those who are not of you who are not familiar with INBRE it is a national institute of health funding mechanism for states who receive lower levels of NIH funding for example Alaska, Nevada, Hawaii and Montana are all INBRE states and the CBPR core is part of Alaska in designed to promote community- based participatory research both for biomedical researchers and community members. We're actually hosting this webinar in response to a request from our community advisory board. Who really wanted to know what data sovereignty might look for their own communities. We had, a lot of interest in this webinar. Around 70 people have registered. I know people are looking forward to receiving a recording of this and I'm really grateful that you're all here today. Yeah. So, the lecture portion of this webinar is going to be about 45 minutes and then we'll hold questions for the end. As it's going to be recorded and available on our INBRE CBPR core website and I'll share that with you over email after this session. So now I'm really excited to introduce Dr. William Carson who will share his expertise and perspectives on data sovereignty today. Dr. Carson is a member of Ohkay Owingeh and a post-doctoral researcher at Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center in the department of indigenous cancer health. He's earned his PhD in health behavior health promotion at the Mel and Enid Zuckerman College of Public Health, studying barriers to healthcare for indigenous students and the role of indigenous identity. His current research is into expanding access to cancer genetic counseling services for indigenous people across the United States. So, welcome Dr. Carson. I'll turn it over to you.

>> Thank you. I'm about to pull up my slides and then I will start. So, all right. Hello everyone. I hope you guys are doing well today. Thank you to Fiona and everybody else to invite me to come speak. I'm very excited to talk about this. I have been working on this not so much as my initial research when I first got back into when I went into my doctoral program but as a I was mentored by my mentor Stephanie Carol and other people who are well versed in indigenous data sovereignty. It's been my additional research that I've done since I've been in my PhD and now my postdoc and incorporated and weaved it through a lot of the research that I do now today and I want to just have as this introduction here give you a brief split it up into three different segments here give you a brief introduction to indigenous populations as they are defined in the global sense as well as a little bit more of a specifics in the United States I want to talk about the basics of indigenous data sovereignty, what it means, what are some key definitions, and then I'm going to talk to you guys a little bit about how I apply it into my research as well. So because again this is a great opportunity to get a glimpse into indigenous data sovereignty and data governance to get peak your curiosity and then if you guys have more interest later I can definitely recommend you some trainings some papers everybody else to then further engross yourself because I've learned this over the course of five years and I'm still developing going on as we go and I think that's going to be one of the really special things about state sovereignty and we will talk a little bit more about that. So before I really get into the whole process of this lecture and this conversation I think it's very important to always do an introduction to who I am because it's always matters you can only talk for so long you can only have a discussion for so long before people are well okay yeah so what why does it matter that you're saying it and that's where I want to give a little bit of a background now so I am a member of Ohkay Owingeh Ohkay Owingeh if you are not familiar with that name that is the Tewa name of San Juan Pueblo or one of the 19 Pueblo tribe one of the six tewas speaking and one of the most northern in the state of New Mexico. We changed our name back to Ohkay Owingeh, our traditional name for Tam Pueblo back in the mid 2000s. I grew up in South Carolina and this was such a significant deal for our Pueblo that they even mailed out letters to all of the all of the members throughout the United States who were not living within the Pueblo's boundaries. As said before, I'm a post-docctoral researcher in the department of indigenous cancer health at Roswell Park, where they do absolutely incredible research trying to expand access to cancer services both within the Haudenosaunee communities here in New York State, but also with partnerships throughout the United States and globally as well. I am also very proud of my affiliation with Tohono O'odham Community College where I serve as an adjunct professor at that fantastic tribal college where I teach introduction to community and public health. As stated my many of my research interests are on identity and tribal enrollment, indigenous data sovereignty and healthcare access. So I have gone from, working with healthcare access generally among student populations now trying to better understand how they work in the United States. I also really just love to read. Last year I achieved about over a hundred books, short stories and, u, manga on Goodreads last year, and I'm hoping to get even more this year. Right now I'm at about 50, in May. So hopefully we're going to get a little bit higher this year as well. I've been really happy to get back into reading after avoiding it for my undergrad and my masters. And finally this right here is just an example of a methodology I am learning to work much more into how I tell my story as far as my research but also to learn a bit more about it to have I help it grow and become a truly valuable valid research method. This is a method called this. This is a spiderweb as a metaphor as written by Ana Doer Inos in a chapter called with respect out of the book out of a Pueblo research methodologies book printed back in 2017. It's a truly this way where everything connects to each other and it's in a nonlinear pattern and the things don't always look they're connected to each other but then similar to a spider's web your research interests and your studies and everything else connect and it becomes this solid strength and that's what I feel when I'm trying to merge the ideas of data sovereignty and identity throughout all of these. So that's where I'm really going to talk about this today. So now that I've got an introduction about myself I think we can go on. So, first thing I want to do is help try to define indigenous populations and who are indigenous peoples. What are some of the legal remedies that we have and what are some of the ways in which we are defined? And I think one of the first ways that we want to talk about this is through the United Nations. So back in 2007 there was a referendum passed for the United Nations ex all except for by four states against Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United States the English-speaking populations which house large indigenous populations with various treaty rights and obligations in them. This was a thing that they opposed at the time. This what this contains is a way to have minimum standards for recognitions, protections and promotions of rights. It establishes a universal framework for minimum standards for the survival, dignity, well-being and rights of indigenous peoples and non-exhaustive lists includes things such as individual and collective rights, cultural rights, rights to education, health, employment, language and outlaws discrimination. So a lot of the things in which we as indigenous populations here in the United States might be aware of these were enshrined as a guidepost for all throughout the world as well because in many places outside of the United States indigenous populations are not legally defined by their governments. In many places they are simply ignored or they are treated as second or secondass or lower peoples. And so this is a way to help provide some remedy to those types of subminations and discrimination. While that does happen in the United States, it happens on a much larger and more violent scale. One of the ways in which I would say that this is most prominently seen is a large number of the refugee and asylum seekers coming into the United States today are indigenous populations, especially if they're coming from Central and South America. So what is an indigenous population? So there is no one single definition. There's nothing there by the United Nations. There's nothing there as well really throughout the world. We are collectively known by our uniqueness and things that separate us and define us as independent peoples. But this is a this is a list of different types of things set up by the United Nations permanent forum on indigenous issues. So self-identification as indigenous peoples at the individual level and by the community and having to be accepted by the community which they affiliate with. A historical continuity with pre-colonial and pre-tler societies a strong link to territories and surrounding natural resources. Distinct social and economic and political systems distinct language culture and beliefs and from a non-dominant group society and they resolve to maintain and stay where they are. So these are some of the main ways in which the United Nations one of their forums recommends that indigenous populations are able to be defined and identified and formally recognized and added to a growing list. And so with these definitions, how many indigenous populations exist globally throughout the world? There's over I believe at this time over seven billion people that might be undercounting it even a bit. We might even be over eight now. I really don't know. But according to the international work group for indigenous affairs, we have almost 500 million indigenous populations throughout the world. Now, this is a non-exhaustive map. This is something that I was able to find on the on the on the internet just as an example of showing where indigenous peoples are self-identifying where they truly appear throughout the world. So, they're across 90 countries and all six habitable continents. And as stated before, while we are identified, as a collective, both here in the United States, with our rights as federal, federally recognized, state recognized, unrecognized peoples, we are also, we are notably known by our differences. So my people, the so my people in Nokia, we are very, we have our own separate government compare, and the rest of the 19 Pueblo have their own separate governments as well. And our communities, cultures and languages are very different than say where I am now. We are in Hosoni territory where they have their own separate cultures and communities as well. So that you see that all throughout the world and while we have indigenity as our backbone we are all unique and different and that's what makes it a truly interesting thing. And one of the other things I want to qualify about this, one, just from looking at the map, I think it's notable to point out while we see where indigenous peoples are, we also can make a point of saying where indigenous peoples are not recognized. I don't necessarily know about the Middle East for this example, but I do want to point out the fact about the about the main continent of Europe. While we have the Sami up there, it's only one indigenous population recognized within the entirety of the European continent. So I find that very fascinating and that is in part due to the fact of self-identification for example. So there's additional populations that fit the criteria but they don't choose to identify and one of the one of the known examples that I took in a course is cat is Catalonians. They fit every single criteria for the most part but they don't identify as indigenous so they are not indigenous. There are groups who do also recognize who wish to be recognized as indigenous populations but they are not recognized in indigenous populations. And the example that I would pull here is the Africconers. And if anybody knows who the Africconers are, those are the descendants of Dutch settlers in South Africa who have been there for about 500 years. So that's necessarily the reason why they are some of the main originators of a part of the apartheidist in South Africa. So I think the next thing I want to talk about is generally as we zoom as we have zoomed all the way out into the global context of indigenous populations, now we're going to go into the American context. So initially when you might think about the American context for indigenous populations, you might think of just simply the 50 states. But I think what's important to recognize is the fact that the United States is not just a country. It is an empire. An empire that stretches and holds territories all across the globe. And so this includes populations. And while we have fairly recognized American Indian, Alaskan Native populations, we have state recognized populations and unrecognized. We also have many other indigenous populations throughout the United States that don't have those recognitions as well. So Native Hawaiians have certainly some rights geared under federal government, but we also have many Pacific Islander indigenous population. So American people from American Samoa, Guam, the Commonwealth of Northern Marana Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, and the Republic of Palao. I was able to I was fortunate to learn much more about many of the indigenous populations here through one of a one of the conferences I was able to attend this spring. So out in Hawaii, so for indigenous researchers and faculty at schools of medicine and centers for health research throughout the United States. Now, how do these def definitions really work? Well, we're not going to spend too much time on this, but generally speaking, there are a lot of, context. So, we have been negotiating and recognized as sovereign populations since before the United States, negotiating with the French, the French, the Spanish, the English. There were treaties made, treaties documents signed, everything that. And that was one of the main primary ways to do it through so it's through federal recognition, federal statute, federal law. So whether it was treaties before the age of 1871. Now it's also through congressional legislation as well as presidential executive orders. A lot of the treaty making while many tribes do have treaties a lot of those in the west do not. And that is due to the Indian appropriations act of 1871. Essentially, this was marking an end to treatym because for one reason it was the fact that there were hundreds of treaties put with hundreds of different indigenous populations throughout the United States. But also another major significant reason was the fact that the United States was tired of dealing with populations which they viewed as less than that they wish to make rid of. So that's one of the big things. So there and this is where a lot of my interests really merge into it which is that okay we have a federal recognition and everything that and let's see how origins of how non-indigenous peoples really define us as indigenous peoples. We've talked about how indigenous people selfidentify, how they recognize themselves. But since we're in the United States and many of these other countries throughout the world, which are, occupying, they are the ones who really, determine, legal rights and everything, which is much a significant challenge. And one of quantum and tribal enrollment. So one of the first historical examples in 18th century Virginia. So it was to try to deny the rights of black, indigenous, and mixed communities through legislation. The child of Indian, the child, a grandchild, great-grandchild of the negro shall be deemed accounted, held and taken into to be a molatto. And this has been enacted through the federal government in the 19th and 20th centuries generally thrown through bookkeeping. And what I mean by that is this entire idea of blood quantum and everything is going off the basic idea that at a certain point when do Indians stop being Indians? When do indigenous peoples cease to be indigenous? And so this has been something that the United States has grappled with and discussed in nuance many times throughout the throughout the world. It's not such a foreign concept. It's something that's still being discussed and still being really discussed in the Supreme Court. And I'll bring that up in a few moments. But that's one of the big things here is that blood quantum is a very foreign concept to indigenous populations, but it was enacted on them and encouraged through a variety of different acts. So one such is the Dawes Act. So partitioning of lands to eligible indigenous peoples. And in this act people were deemed to be if they had a quarter blood they were being reel eligible. Now one of the big problems with this is that many populations if they were not able to make it in time to register in person they would lose their rights. Many populations such as Cherokee such as Muski or Cherokee Freman who were mixed indigenous and black they were not recognized as being indigenous at all and they were lose their rights. Additionally, one of the other well-known things is that, white populations of settlers were able to buy their way onto roles. So, they were able to become indigenous through this bookkeeping act. And so, they were able to buy their way onto tribal enrollment laws and still are on these roles to this day. So, then there was the commission. So, of 200,000 applications for, five tribes, only 101 applications were accepted back in Oklahoma. And many there were a variety of reasons for this but one of the main reasons to really discuss this is that indigenous populations they were seeking to seize power. So one of the major things this did is this took away massive amounts of reservation land territory that were originally given away that were given to them and set aside in the state of Oklahoma. And the Indian reorganization act of 1934 was a significant one. It encouraged empowered tribal nations to become more independent after the attempt of boarding schools and everything and the mismanagement of the 1900s the two 1930s failed Meriam report put out they encouraged tribes to write their own constitutions but there was a heavy push to do blood quant blood quantum of one quarter or one half and so many of these tribal constitutions are still in the play today and these are still implemented today. So a little bit more about the state level. Not only was this happening at the federal level, it's also happening at the state level. So in space the Virginia for example where many federal tribes have been re-recognized in the past, 20 years, we have noticed, one of the reasons that so many tribes were diminished or ignored was due to state level efforts. So in the 1924 racial integrity act, there were only two races that were, deemed to be existing. There was either white people or non-white people. So essentially and back in this time and one of the other things about this is that indigenous peoples were erased and this was because back in the 1920s 30s and 40s the state was in charge of counting and counting the census for the states. So they were able to define the populations that they were counting as opposed to it being done in a federal level and nationalized at a later date. And that led to the indigenous population of Virginia going from in the tens of thousands to roughly, I believe it was 50 in 1940. So it went from tens of thousands in 1920 to about 50. And they were all white populations who had bought their way on to being wanting to be known as being indigenous. And the final thing I want to talk about is we talk about federal legislation, state legislation. I also just want to talk about, one of the things that I find very interesting when we talk about indigenous populations and how they're defined is the Supreme Court. Something that I'm keeping my eye on, something I paid attention to when I took federal Indian law is that there were two different cases in which there were very fascinating arguments and written arguments here. It was Rice Cayetano, which is a office of Hawaiian Affairs only allowed Hawaiians and Native Hawaiians to vote. The court count of Congress did not find did not find reason to treat Native Hawaiians as tribes. And this the quote that really stuck out to me and made me nervous about this is that the Constitution of the United States too has become the heritage of all citizens of Hawaii. While there are treaties in place, while there was recognition and still continues to be recognition of Native Hawaiians in, dating back to the 1700s because it was so long ago, the Supreme Court has ruled that, well, they're also really, really American now, too, as well. And this one as well is this is a adoptive couple versus baby girl. This is an argument about the Indian child welfare act who can be adopted who cannot be. And one of the sitting Supreme Court justices right now, Samuel Alito, talking about how in their discussion, I believe it was in the not the actual this was not in the actual court, Supreme Court, but this was in the rebuttal because he was sitting on the side that opposed minority. It's just talking about the theuh percentage Cherokee that this person was three out of 256. And while that doesn't necessarily matter for Cherokee Nation because they are a lineal descent people, it is something that I'm continuing to keep my eye on because this is a quote and this is a population, that would be much more interested in diminishing indigenous peoples even further. So, we've talked about indigenous populations, how they're recognized, how they're being acknowledged, and everything else. I now want to talk about, more about indigenous data sovereignty. So, we just said, we've had attempted erasers. This is a very this is a clip that was gone viral from one of our people in our work group which is the indigenous data alliance where these slides are from and this was a this was a quote here where it's this was the exit poll from I believe 2020 and talking about the different populations who were supporting different types of things. So you had white, Latino, black, something else in Asian. And there was a big upcry of population which included ours which is indigenous talking about how we're not just something else. You need to count us as well. And so that was the idea here is you are by merging everybody else here you are erasing them from existence and just merging them into other category. And so this is just yet another way in which general population in the United States does do this eraser in some ways. So in our data so this is just another one of these stories here. So what some what are our data stories? Indigenous peoples have always been data experts. Formation expansion of US impacts how we maintain our knowledges and data. We share impacts of US dominion. We have distinct experiences and our unique data stories will help us m collective path forward. What it means by that is the way that I see it is that we have had centuries of occupation, centuries of having our data be analyzed on us about us from a deficit lens. So seeing why we are not being as healthy, why we are not achieving the same roots goals as general populations. A lot being discussed both on both sides of a political aisle just about what some of the problems here in historical things but really just trying to figure out how to empower our own people to get back our rights, get back our data, get back our authority to control ourselves and then that'll lead to better things. And the thing I now want to really pull up is now the pyramid of indigenous data. So there is increasing data sovereignty here towards the top and decreasing increasing data dependence on the bottom. So data which is by them for them which is at the very bottom. So data which might be just writing up people talking about various things. So we're just a data point for general health in the United States talking about deficits or discussing things such as Medicaid and everything. There you have buy them for us which again is written say back 30 years ago having a lot of documentation researchers come in and to go into indigenous communities and write up reports and then present it back out and discuss it and then buy us for them so indigenous peoples taking over and working within federal state those types of authoritative areas and then buy them with us. So these are things where collaboration really comes into play, getting data sharing agreements, everything there. This is a place where I really sit and I'm going to really talk about in my own research and then by us for us. So these are our indigenous scientists, indigenous governments really working on our own projects as well. And when we talk about indigenous data as well, we want to really understand what is indigenous data, what makes up an indigenous population, indigenous nation. And this comes up with a variety of different things. So it includes resources such as our land such as our water such as the air we breathe such as our environments. It makes up our communities our communities both within our tribal nations as well as our diaspora living all across the United States and the globe. It makes up our lands. It makes up where we hunt where we fish. Going back to Ohkay Owingeh we have our fishing we have our lakes we have our farms. We have everything that. And then as well as our citizens links up with our citizens, our citizens, people who have those federally recognized rights, who have that authority, who how do we continue to exert that? How do we continue to have our people, both grow and also exert the power and the authority necessary to continue our communities going forward? So to define a little bit more about indigenous data sovereignty, we want to talk about indigenous data sovereignty is the rights of indigenous peoples and nations to govern the data collection, ownership, and application of their own data. So it derives from our inherent rights to govern as stated by the United Nations and other places. Those are not the ways in which we gain our rights. Our rights are simply perpetual in existence. They have always existed. They existed before the United Nations. They exist for law by other for occupying countries and they will exist after as well. Our knowledge belongs to the collective and formed fundamental our people. It generates and roles responsibilities and use for our communities. And so these are ways in which we want to have essentially having our having our rights recognized, honored, having our data be used for us preferably by us but also if not by us in partnership with us to improve the goals of our communities that we wish to self-exert. So data governance is one of the ways in which we actually do this. So this is a means of implementing greater indigenous data sovereignty. So this is where a lot of the practice-based applications of things will really come into because while the ideas of indigenous state sovereignty are great without the application is where we really get into a little bit of trouble. So one of the ways in which this really is a managed to care principles and I can recommend that I can send out a link to that as well after this talk. But these are led by individ indigenous individuals and collectives. So by individual governments, individual researchers and organizations and hopefully places NCAI, some of the other ones and KUI all that and they inherently uphold indigenous state sovereignty through negotiations through demanding the fact that indigenous people should have a say in all the laws, policies, frameworks and everything that exists on and about indigenous peoples whether it's their land, their communities, their health statuses, the traditional determinance of health, social determinance of health, traditional understood western ideas of what is data as well as the indigenous data. So that can include things such as cultural activities, singing, language, song, dance, anything that can be recorded and understood valuable to indigenous peoples that is data and that should have if it is accessed or shared out with outside of tribal nation there should be some indigenous data governance strategy to protect the rights of indigenous peoples. So this is the thing here. It is a positive feedback loop. So indigenous state of sovereignty we understand is we understand as a means to an end. So we have this idea of where rights are. We build it out. We get established partnerships and it keeps building on be building on feedback intending to go. We identify a problem with data. We build out the structure to build out the systems, the infrastructure to access this data and present the type of data sharing capabilities and capacities and then we present it back and then we continue moderating to see what other problems are coming up and then we either continue building out on that specific area or we go to a different section as well. And so one of the other things is reclaiming indigenous state of sovereignty. So going from this idea and that's where it's such an important idea to have more and more indigenous populations being trained and being into the sciences being into through mast's programs through PhD programs and getting this training underway. We have to have that type of go from having our governments and everything and occupied and health care organizations and everything I would say that to going from being manned and staffed and working part primarily with non-indigenous researchers and scientists to then also then transitioning to having our indigenous scientists who are trained in indigenous data sovereign principles to then being the ones that we work with whether it's through organizations outside of the outside of the tribal nations or staffing our tribal nations with these types of peoples. So going from this idea of everything is about us and having to go ask for these types of data to then instead empowering us get our get as much data as possible to then work for ourselves and work for our own interests and needs. And so this is another slide here which is on being a good relative for shared indigenity. So we want to provide an anti-colonial perspective inclusive view of indigenous peoples trans we want to transcend original colonial frameworks western frameworks everything that and really try to empower indigenous nations to get exactly what they need out of research projects data access working with federal state agencies on various things that they collect and reports that they build out how we can build out reports that might be beneficial as well. One of the other things that we really want to talk about is overcoming legacies of structural racism through data relation. Really over really emphasizing the fact that sovereignty matters that indigenous peoples and in order to build up and build strong nations both now and into the future our sovereignty must be recognized. We must be always have a seat at the table when discussing any type of indigenous health status reports or anything to do with our data before we go into it. So where are we now? This is a document from Dominique Chavez. So it's from David Chavez and Gavin from 2018, a global assessment of community engagement and climate research. So this is just different types of things where you might want to consider where you your communities are currently on this spectrum. So going from no engagement, contractual engagement, consultive, collaborative, collegial and indigenous. So whether it's no engagement so no research no partnership at all contractual you have really you have contracts working with people you are consulted you have advisory boards things that collaborative access is you are seen as a partner on the projects collegial you work very much hand in hand with indigenous is that your groups are leads and you might ask other people on the leads but indigenous people are developing leading and driving the forces for this data So going back again to this idea of pyramid of indigenous data. The thing that I would say that I sit most with is most likely due to the fact that we are again a smaller population in the United States and there is so much data out there on and about indigenous populations. I really do find myself gravitating towards this part right here. So buy them with us. So that is through because there's while we are having an incredible number of indigenous people is going to get higher education and everything that we still even if we wait for that to happen it's going to take decades to continue to catch up. So we need to have other ways to work with non-indigenous partners to then build it out. So some of the ways that we do this is through data sharing agreements understanding some of the challenges that are very that are coming up with how we access data who gets to access the data and that's one of the big things. So the final part of this presentation is really going into my practice for indigenous data sovereignty. So the first thing that I wanted to talk about is because I didn't mention some of my background but it did really give me much of the understanding and insight when I was trying to go back to school is that I worked for the CDC as a public health associate during COVID-19 and so I got to see much of the experience much of the process for how the federal response and the state response in Arizona worked for emergency operations to COVID-19 So when I got to the so when I got to my program and learned that New Mexico was having issues, I had an idea of well if there were issues with how their data staring out, some of the conflicts that were going on within the state of Mexico. A lot of it most likely had to do with something around, the guidelines because one of the big things about working on the response was that you really don't get any opportunity because there's so much work and there was so much pressure at all times, especially early in the response, you really didn't get a lot of opportunity to, build anything out, develop anything on your own. You were really just going off a handbook and instruction manual. So, what was going really off? So when we were talking about that, that's where this paper really emerged. And one of the big things that was driving this was that federal investigation there was all different types of discriminatory policies going on. There were some weird things going on within state government giving access to certain population, certain organizations, but not others. Different types of things were going on. This was in the largest state hospital. This is in the largest hospital system in the Albuquerque area where they had a Pueblo list pro which was racial profiling for indigenous populations in the in there. So if they were on the zip code or they identified as Pueblo pregnant women who were giving birth would be isolated from their babies right after giving birth to and for a period of days because to make sure they didn't have COVID and early in the pandemic if people are not very much remembering that COVID tests were not rapid. You could not get a 15-minute test. They weren't reliable. They weren't accessible. You had to wait, two, three days at a lab to get back results. So, women were being mothers were being isolated for days. A traumatic experience all because of, this assumption that indigenous populations in New Mexico were, at a much higher risk for, COVID-19 compared to others. So, that was one of the problems there. Another thing that was coming on is there was a lot of pressure and a lot of fear-mongering that was going on by the by the New Mexico government at that time. So this is an example of this. So when we talk about COVID-19 spread to most New Mexico tribes right around the same time the governor of New Mexico she was on she was c reported on about how this COVID-19 pandemic if it wasn't maintained if it wasn't managed it could have the ability to erase every single Pueblo p every single Pueblo tribe within the state if not managed. So this was the type of fear and the type of pressure and things that were really going on. And so it would lead to things this. And if anybody doesn't know what this is, this is a SAS or a Stata report. And it was given by request of thei by department of health and human services to this random newspaper organization there in the there in New Mexico. Telling people exactly how many different Pueblo different Pueblo people Navajo people were infected with COVID-19 at that point in time. So we had these things going on at the same time and conversations tribal epidemiology center we saw that there were different types of populations there were also the tribal epidemiology center was not getting access to things. So this was the stuff there. So we had all different types of policies in place that were not really addressing different types of things. And so one of the big things that we go over here and I'm going to speed through this because I want to get through the rest of the ideas here is that there was a comparison here between the collaboration acts and everything that was compelled between the state of Arizona and the state of New Mexico. One of the other big things that was discussed here is that a zip code level data in the state of New Mexico was identifiable to anybody who could access. So you could go in and I did and go check up on every single Pueblo within the state of New Mexico and see how many cases they had, how many deaths they had, how many active cases they had and you couldn't see that in Arizona. Many of the tribal nations in Arizona where zip codes were blocked. You couldn't access that type of stuff. So that was one of the things I was really wondering about. So one of the big challenges, seeing there was that tribal nations with had were not really written into the emer operations plans. They were not written into COVID-19 protocols. Data sharing agreements were not really compelled or anything. There was none by the time the COVID-19 op emergency was closed by the United States. And so that was the big recommendations and things that we drive here is that you have to include working with tribal nations in every single thing especially emergency preparedness. You have to bring forward the ideas of working with epidemiology centers that are public health authorities and giving them the ability because too many tribal nations don't have epidemiologists and so the way that they compensate for that and the way the United States compensate for that is through the tribal epidemiology centers and so scaling through that we have this list of recommendations to enhance the emergency operations plans for the next for the next one because there's always going to be another so that's one of the things here going back to the idea of tribal enrollment. Now, this is one of the other things that we're really working on. So respecting indigenous data sovereignty when utilizing tribal identifiable data. So, this is a project that has been worked on over the past year. It emerged from my dissertation through conversations. It wasn't something that was a main driver of my dissertation, but it was really just a conversation I had based on some things I discussed with some of the administrators at University of Arizona and continue to think about today. So, big question here is what is tribal enrollment data legally? So given that it's generated by tribes and only able to be verified by tribes, what really is it? It's data on citizenry, but what do we really know about it? Can it be protected by HIPAA and FERPA? Can drives man access to this data? So and one of the ways in which we really want to talk about that is again so this has been done and discussed in education before. This is a fantastic little policy brief that I have permission to share out. But it's this idea of tribal. So there's three different ways in which indigenous peoples can be identified. There's the race and ethnic ethnicity. So this is self-identification. It can include Canada and Central America. You can also have tribal affiliation which is also selfidentified. So anybody so on the US census or when they're filling out forms at any type of organization, university, anything that and they ask for your affiliation, you can say whatever you want. Nobody's stopping you from doing that. But for organizations and stuff, say for scholarships or access to Indian health service or access to specific type of loans, you have to be able to provide proof of your citizenship and your enrollment within your tribal nation. And so that is data that is only generated and authorized by the tribal nation. But what do we really know about what it is? What legal rights do tribes have to really get this? And so this is just some information on tribal education departments. I can share some slides back but this is really emphasizing that tribal education departments while they manage a lot of stuff a lot of their funds come from a variety of different organis mechanisms draw so it's not just that they have a set number of things so for scholarships they have to balance so many things for different types of people I see in their way but who else gets access to data and so I'll share the slides as well but I do want to get through this so who gets access to tribal enrollment data so tribal enrollment data just to reemphasize is data on tribal nations. So, and it belongs to tribes, but there's all different types of actors. There's hundreds of actors throughout the world, throughout the United States who have access to this data and then share it out. So, that includes urban Indian organizations, scholarship organizations, universities, Indian health service, housing programs, and there are more that I can't think about as well. So, universities for example, so not every tribe, not every university has scholarships specifically for indigenous populations, but for those who have tribal scholarships, they always are almost they're almost always collected, you have to have required proof of enrollment of an enrolled of a tribal nation, whether it's a state recognized or a federal recognized depending on the eligibility, whether it's from a specific state. It all depends, but you have to submit your data to the university to deem yourself eligible for the scholarship and I'm not entirely certain what happens to that data after they get access to it. It's not really certain about what happens. And when you look at the data we've done, I'll talk about in a few minutes, we'll see that as well. Same thing with scholarship organizations. These organizations are fantastic. I received funding from Native Forward, one of these tribal scholarship organizations for six years through my masters and my PhD programs. They do a tremendous amount of work and tremendous service for federal for tribal for indigenous peoples in the United States. Despite this they're they are benefiting they are they have a whole organization which pays a lot of people has a board everything else that and so they do have a whole economic system to benefit from tribal nations and tribal citizens so what data when they collect all this data on eligible people whether or not they're accepted for scholarships or not what do they do to return this data that's something same thing here Indian health service to be accessible for Indian health service you there have to be a tribal member yourself or a descendant or a spouse . So when you collect this data and you're not going to the Indian health service from your community, what exactly are you getting? What exactly happens to that data once they collect it? Same thing here is are we any organizations? Well, many of them don't have access to services. They don't limit access services. Some of them do and you can't get access to every single service. What happens there? So what do we talk about this for? To continue to emphasize this idea the tribal nation data even something as simple as a tribal ID is tribal data it is something that is about and as we've discussed with indigenous data sovereignty that is then data on and about indigenous populations and so while all these people have it we have to find ways and mechanisms to get access to this data back to tribes if they want them and so that's actually the next project that we've been working on over this past spring So this is just a paper that we have here. But one of the research projects that we have here with MPH students is I'm currently working with students at Columbia this past spring as part of a community engagement practice class. And we are looking at one how TRUS treats and recognizes tribal enrollment data both do they define it do they recognize it but also what do we do with data on foreign nationals within the United States. So people from foreign countries who come in here and occupy, what data do those countries get on their information here? So I can talk about that a little bit, but I really want to just quickly emphasize that these students none of them are indigenous themselves. Only one of them out of the five had worked with anything to do with indigenous population before, had any idea about indigenous data sovereignty. And so over the course of about six weeks, we were able to catch up to speed and get a lot of this practice in here. So I just want to share and be really proud of the work that they did. So this is one of the things that they put up here. So the idea again of what exactly is tribal enrollment data. They got some examples here. So this is the stuff that we really looked at. So we looked at a variety of things. So as we defined here earlier we looked at housing organizations, scholarship organizations, universities, healthcare practitioners, federal government sites, state organizations, and we also looked at a variety of different settings for international students. And so we've created this really nice tracker. We've really talked about the type of things that we're really seeing here. So what things they do they collect this tribal enrollment data? So they require you to show proof of your enrollment status to receive services. Do they do they talk about do they have data sharing agreements? And if they don't talk about do they define, what tribal enrollment data is, how it's used, and are there any other things that we might be needing to be considering. So another thing here is these are some more slides which I was very proud. I just wanted to show off some of the work done. So again here this is just the education services that they screened and they checked up on and I helped review and this is some of the stuff that we saw in international student data. So when we talk about this type of problem of hey tribal enrollment status data tribal citizenry enrollment IDs the tribal IDs this might be something that we need to actually take a look on. It's well we need to have some evidence some justification for that. And I think the way that we really did that is going to look at international student data, looking at, what's actually known, what's actually not known about this type of information. So, we've looked at this. I've added another one since then, but we do see that there are partnerships that the United States does with foreign nations to help, United States based, to help foreign countries, get some limited access. Not always, but there's a way for there's a way for other countries to request access or have data sharing agreements with the United States. A at US border customs and border patrol. So it's certainly possible and so one of the next things that we're really trying to do now is trying to write this up. We have all this data. So now we're going to try and write it up and have some recommendations. So there's structural inequ inequity in data systems. So tribal nations have a nation relationship with the United States. No equivalent data tracking infrastructure exists as opposed to with you with foreign nationals. We have a lack of institutional accountability. There's not really officials or anybody who really partners with this. There's nobody for tribal nations if they want to go out and get this data. They can't go to the department of education or something and go ask, hey, we need all the people who have, applied for scholarships or receive scholarships or gotten these things here. It's not possible. It's not how the system's set up. So instead, what you would have to do as a tribal nation is you would have to go to every single university that has a scholarship system this, every single scholarship organization, and go get the data that way. And that's just not feasible. People are not going to do that. And so while this data might be useful, it's not something that anybody can get. And so that's the next step there is after we identify the problem, we have to build it out. So there's structural inequity in data systems. No mechanisms for notification data is used. So anytime an India health service if a tribal member if I say me if I wanted to go use healthcare services down in one of the Hopi reservations here or if I wanted to receive more scholarship funds from Native Forward for if I want to go back for a masters again my Pueblo will have no idea unless I tell them and so how do we figure that out and so this is some of the ideas here so future directions so we're working on this right now the current state of tribal so we working on these type of projects right now we're working we're going to inor incorporate this, bring it forward a little bit more. Hopefully once we get these papers out and studies out, then we can work, with tribal nations, with, larger organizations to build this out, get them the ability and empower them to build out data sharing agreements, these types of things over the next several years. And although it's high enrollment data over tribal governments, it's widely used by external agencies and actors. This is by design. It's meant, it's meant to help every tribal citizen as possible. That's not really the negative here. What we're talking about is that the data just vanishes after it's used and tribes don't really have any idea of how to access it. They can't access it in any, real manual way. And then so that's some of the main takeaways that I would say. And the biggest takeaway from a lot of the work that I do around identity and around enrollment is that the thing that I've really understood is tribal enrollment data belongs to tribal nations. It is tribal nation data. When I received my travel ID, I had to apply for it. I had to get all this, I have to go, I have to go redeem it every, renew it every five years or so. And so this type of data, while I use it for everything I do, while other organizations can use it for, giving me access to certain funds, they're, entitled to us as indigenous peoples, tribes don't have any way to access this or know where their people are. And I think that's one of the big things that I truly think about. It's if we're worried about nation building, if we're worried about ensuring ourselves to last for another hundred years, last for another, in my case of my Pueblo, another thousand years, we have to, think about these things. We have to build ourselves back up, bring people back. And so, this is one of the ways in which I envision us being able to do it. So, that's all I have. These are some of the references. If there's other things, other questions, slides you want available, I'm happy to do that as well. So, other I just want to say hunda thank you for your time today. And yeah, I'm happy to answer any questions, but I appreciate that. I hope that was it. It's a lot. It's a lot of stuff to talk about, but thank you so much for sitting through it. I appreciate it.

>> Yeah, thank you so much. Dr. Carson, that was a really fantastic presentation. I appreciate it. And I think my video there is a question in the chat. Which is has there been any discussion on the use of AI and indigenous data?

>> Yes, there is a big discussion about the use of AI and indigenous data. I was actually at the indigenous data sovereignty summit. Sorry, it's really I can't do anything about that. Let me push that over here. Is that better? I think so. So, one of the things that we had about that is that was a big thing about the Indigenous Data Sovereignty Summit here back in Tucson back in April. So there were a lot of people talking about AI usage and I don't necessarily know enough about that at the moment to really talk about but there are a lot of people talking about this. There's a lot of there's a lot of warnings but there's also some really incredible people espec there's a Native Hawaiian woman who is brilliant and she is very much a person who is trying to do very proi stuff. So I think that might be a really wonderful person I can give you guys the name of to talk about. But yeah it is hotly debated. It's really questioned. I think one of the big takeaways again is we're going with indigenous data sovereignty. I think it's about making sure that we have access to data storage ourselves. That these things the clouds and all this an amputationist analytics are done can be protected and tribal data can be assured. So when we talk about how AI is being used for a lot of different things within the medical systems a lot of those systems are set up to be isolated. There's meant to be, sec separate off from the rest. So, they're not as accessible. So, they are HIPAA compliant. So, data protections are, still optical. So, it's just something that we do have to consider. And while I'm personally an I'm personally an AI skeptic, we also can't just be skeptics because AI is being pushed no matter what. I don't know if you guys saw that. Google search is going to completely change in the next couple in the next year or so, but it's happening and it's unfortunate, but we just have to prepare.

>> Thank you. Are there any other questions? I think you can put it in the chat or raise your hand. I think you can unmute yourselves too. Let me know. I particularly appreciated the Arizona New Mexico comparison. I thought that was really fascinating. And in research, I generally only consider the limited research specific data and where that goes and what our smaller policies are. So that was really helpful to start thinking about I was surprised by that. When you see those two states next to each other, much about the politics about it. Arizona is a very red state. While we have a lot of blue people in high positions, is a very red dominated state throughout. The legislators are completely red and historically they're super red, but and New Mexico is the opposite. But what we see in that the actual policies and you see how it's been done is they are very much stronger. The policies compel state agencies to be much more collaborative with tribal nations in Arizona as opposed to a lot of suggesting in the logical policies of New Mexico. And so while there's a lot of great people in New Mexico, I think it's more about the fact of and a lot of people in the state governments were fantastic, it's a lot more about the policies are forcing, people in Arizona to be much more collaborative. And so while you still have great collaboration in New Mexico, it's how can you also compel people in sales?

>> And I want to respect everyone's time. So I think we'll just take this question. Are there already systems to share data between healthcare systems that IHS could use or use as inspiration?

>> So I mean no not really because the IHS system is not really a system in itself. So the IHS system is comprised of IHS facilities. It's also comprised of six of PL 638 facilities which are facilities which are funded which are self-determined facilities. So they receive just a lump sum from the Indian health service to spend as they wish. So but the tribe then is the sole proprietor owner of owner of their healthcare facilities in that place. And then you also have the urban centers and every single urban center is not run by a tribe or anything that. They just receive IHS money and they're all independent organizations themselves. So even if you go to the urban centers, they don't have any type of communication between them. So let's say you get service at one UIO, you can't just transfer easily, say if you move cities. That's it would be nice to have that set up, but you just don't have it. Same thing with IHS facilities. Yeah, it's possible to request that type of data, but there's nothing set up where it's automated. The way that I've seen my Pueblo do it is that they have to specifically write out a formal letter dictating what exactly they're looking for and what the justification is and then they can potentially get it from each service unit that they request that from. But it's again, they have to go through every single service unit because there's no centralized system to get that data.

>> Okay, awesome. Thank you so much, Dr. Carson. That was fantastic. And I think there are a lot of there's a lot of interest in getting these slides as well. I'll send out a link to the video, but would you mind sharing them with people or

>> Yeah, absolutely.

>> Yeah. Okay. Amazing. Well, yeah. Thank you so much everyone for joining us and I hope everyone has a great day.

>> Thank you again. You're welcome.
